                                                           MODEL BASED ACTIVE SLOSH DAMPING EXPERIMENT

                                                                        C. Jetzschmann1 , H. Strauch1 , S. Bennani2
                                                               1
                                                                Airbus DS GmbH, Airbus Allee 1, 28199 Bremen, Germany
                                             christina.jetzschmann@airbus.com +494215393597, hans.strauch@airbus.com +494215395316
                                                            2
                                                              ESA/ESTEC, Keplerlaan 1, 2200 AG Noordwijk, The Netherlands
                                                                         samir.bennani@esa.int +31715658099
arXiv:1801.10017v1 [cs.SY] 30 Jan 2018




                                                                                          ABSTRACT

                                                This paper presents a model based experimental investigation to demonstrate the usefulness of an
                                                active damping strategy to manage fluid sloshing motion in spacecraft tanks. The active damping
                                                strategy is designed to reduce the degrading impact on maneuvering and pointing performance via
                                                a force feedback strategy. Many problems have been encountered until now, such as instability of
                                                the closed loop system, excessive consumption in the attitude propellant or problems for engine
                                                re-ignition in upper stages. Mostly, they have been addressed in a passive way via the design of
                                                baffles and membranes, which on their own have mass and constructive impacts. Active manage-
                                                ment of propellant motion in launchers and satellites has the potential to increase performance
                                                on various levels. This paper demonstrates active slosh management using force feedback for
                                                the compensation of the slosh resonances. Force sensors between tank and the carrying structure
                                                provide information of the fluid motion via the reaction force. The control system is designed to
                                                generate an appropriate acceleration profile that leads to desired attenuation profiles in amplitude,
                                                frequency and time. Two robust control design methods, one based on µ design and the other on
                                                parametric structured design based on non-smooth optimization of the worst-case H∞ norm, are
                                                applied. The controller is first tested with a computational fluid dynamics simulation in the loop.
                                                Finally a water tank mounted on a Hexapod with up to 1100 liter is used to evaluate the control
                                                performance. The paper illustrates that is possible to actively influence sloshing via closed loop.

                                         1    INTRODUCTION

                                         The ratio between propellant mass and dry mass in satellites and particularly in launchers can easily
                                         exceed one. Such a high value of fluid can cause instability of the closed loop system, excessive
                                         consumption in the attitude propellant when the control system tries to counteract the sloshing, or
                                         problems for engine re-ignition in upper stages because the propellant is not properly located at the
                                         tank outlet. In most of the cases this has been only addressed in a passive fashion: On the constructive
                                         side baffles or membranes are implemented. On the flight software side (GNC level) the destabilizing
                                         impact of the sloshing resonant mode is often just filtered out via notch filters. This is considered as
                                         a passive approach since there is no sensing, actuation and control action.
                                         Active management of propellant motion offers the potential to increase performance on various
                                         levels. Examples are large angle slewing maneuvers of upper stages performed in such a way that
                                         the propellant stays close to the tank bottom or increasing the damping in powered flight phases of


                                         ESA GNC 2017 – C Jetzschmann                                                                                   1
launchers. Force sensors between tank and the carrying structure can provide information of the
fluid motion via the reaction force. A control system will be designed generating an appropriate
acceleration profile that leads to a desired closed loop behavior.




Figure 1: Workflow Development and Test - Left side: Active damping on Hexapod under one g,
Right side: Excitation free spin-up (open loop) experiment on ISS in zero g (in preparation)


A model based design approach allows approaching the development of such a controller in a struc-
tured way ([1]). At first, an analytic description of the slosh motion is derived. This serves as the
basis for the control design. The next step is to set-up a simulation infrastructure based on physical
modeling, in this case with Flow3D for a computational fluid dynamic (CFD) representation of the
propellant dynamics ([2]) and Mathwork’s SimMechanics for the Hexapod representation which is
used for exciting the slosh motion. It is of importance that the CFD must interact with the controller
in closed loop ([3]). Replacing the analytic design model with the CFD provides a first test on the
suitability of the designed controller. The last step must of course be the test with real fluids.
In order to prove the concept of active damping and to show the mastering of the complete develop-
ment cycle from theoretical design to CFD simulation to hardware-in-the-loop, a tank with fill levels
from 600 to 1100 liter water is placed on a Hexapod. The fluid is deliberately excited into an oscilla-
tory phase. The reaction force between tank and Hexapod attachment is measured and the controller
commands the Hexapod with the purpose of damping the slosh motion after it has been excited into
an oscillatory, very lightly damped motion.
Two controller architectures are tested and compared. The first is a classical µ design with a model
reduction applied to the resulting controller. The second one is a fixed structure controller based on
the Mathworks’ Robust Control Toolbox ’robust systune’ feature, which implements the algorithm
from [4]. This last technique is very attractive insofar as it allows to derive robust controller for
prescribed controller topologies. However, the parametric structured design, which minimizes the
worst-case H∞ norm, is based on non-smooth optimization. This can lead to large, abrupt changes in
the controller parameters for even small changes in the weighting function, which defy the intuition.
A full order µ controller is therefore a good guiding principal serving as a benchmark.
In order to have a reliable process allowing to move from simulation to the hardware-in-the-loop,

ESA GNC 2017 – C Jetzschmann                                                                         2
