                                                   Sloshing in vertical cylinders with circular walls:
                                                   the effect of radial baffles

                                                   Nikolay Kuznetsov, Oleg Motygin
arXiv:2107.09501v1 [physics.flu-dyn] 18 Jul 2021




                                                   Abstract The behaviour of sloshing eigenvalues and eigenfunctions is studied for
                                                   vertical cylindrical containers that have circular walls and constant (possibly infinite)
                                                   depth. The effect of breaking the axial symmetry due to the presence of radial
                                                   baffles is analysed. It occurs that the lowest eigenvalues are substantially smaller for
                                                   containers with baffles going throughout the depth; moreover, all eigenvalues are
                                                   simple in this case. On the other hand, the lowest eigenvalue has multiplicity two in
                                                   the absence of baffle. It is shown how these properties affect the location of maxima
                                                   and minima of the free surface elevation and the location of its nodes.



                                                   1 Introduction

                                                   The sloshing of a fluid in various partially filled containers is a topic of great interest
                                                   to engineers, physicists and mathematicians. It has received extensive study; see, for
                                                   example, the monographs [1] and [2] (the second one has more than 100 pages of
                                                   references). A historical review going back to the 18th century can be found in [3],
                                                   whereas the comprehensive book [4] presents an advanced mathematical approach
                                                   to the problem based on spectral theory of operators in a Hilbert space. It is also
                                                   worth mentioning that the 2012 Ig Nobel Prize for Fluid Dynamics was awarded
                                                   to Krechetnikov and Mayer for their work [5] concerning the dynamics of sloshing
                                                   when walking with a mug of coffee.


                                                   N. Kuznetsov
                                                   Laboratory for Mathematical Modelling of Wave Phenomena, Institute for Problems in Mechanical
                                                   Engineering, Russian Academy of Sciences, V.O., Bol’shoy pr. 61, St. Petersburg 199178, Russian
                                                   Federation e-mail: nikolay.g.kuznetsov@gmail.com
                                                   O. Motygin
                                                   Laboratory for Mathematical Modelling of Wave Phenomena, Institute for Problems in Mechanical
                                                   Engineering, Russian Academy of Sciences, V.O., Bol’shoy pr. 61, St. Petersburg 199178, Russian
                                                   Federation e-mail: mov@ipme.ru,o.v.motygin@gmail.com


                                                                                                                                                1
2                                                          Nikolay Kuznetsov, Oleg Motygin

   The standard approach to sloshing is based on the linear water wave theory (see
again the books [1] and [2]). In its framework, one seeks sloshing modes and frequen-
cies using eigenfunctions and eigenvalues, respectively, of a mixed Steklov problem
for the Laplace equation, and so a spectral parameter, say 𝜈, appears in a boundary
condition, whereas the radian frequency of fluid’s oscillations is proportional to the
square root of 𝜈.
   The question of suppression of sloshing by means of baffles (it is of importance
for practice) goes back to the 1960s. The corresponding experimental and theoretical
results were the topic of numerous NASA Technical Reports cited in [2] (in particular,
a lot of data is summarised in [6]). In many cases, it was found that the effect of
a baffle is to lower sloshing frequencies, especially, the lowest one. Therefore, a
lot of research has been carried out in this field since the 1960s. In particular,
some quite sophisticated techniques were developed for numerical evaluation of this
effect during the past 30 years; here we mention a few methods that look the most
interesting. In [7], eigenfunction expansions were applied on either side of a vertical
baffle in a rectangular tank. By matching these expansions one obtains an integral
equation on the interval below or above the baffle. The approach developed in [8],
uses fundamental solutions of the problem for reducing it to an integral equation in
the case of a vertical circular container with a horizontal annular baffle. The method
of successive conformal mappings leading to standard truncated matrix eigenvalue
problems which are then solved numerically was used in [9], where several different
baffles in a horizontal circular cylinder were considered.
   Despite abundant numerical and analytical results (see e.g. [10] and references
therein), the mechanism of the baffle effect is far from being completely understood.
The aim of this note is to show the crucial role of breaking the axial symmetry in this
phenomenon. For this purpose we compare properties of explicit solutions obtained
by separation of variables for two pairs of vertical cylindrical containers.
   First, we consider sloshing frequencies and the corresponding modes that describe
free oscillations of a fluid in a circular container of constant depth which has or has
not the following radial baffle. It is located between the cylinder’s axis and the vertical
wall and goes throughout the container’s depth. (According to Fox and Kuttler [3], it
was Lord Rayleigh [11] who completed the solution of the problem without baffle,
studies of which were initiated by Ostrogradsky and Poisson in the 1820s.) The
second pair of containers includes the vertical annular cylinder without and with
the radial baffle that connects the cylinder’s walls orthogonally to them and goes
throughout the container’s depth. To the author’s knowledge, no comparison of the
described solutions was ever published. Thus, a gap concerning the mechanism of
the hydrodynamic effect due to radial baffles is filled in at least partially.



2 Statement of the problem

The general formulation of the three-dimensional sloshing problem is as follows.
A fluid domain, say 𝑊, is bounded from above by a free surface and from below
