                                                  Effect of baffles on pressurization and thermal stratification in
                                                                   a LN2 tank under micro-gravity
                                                                        Zuo Zhongqi, Jiang Wenbing, Huang Yonghua∗
arXiv:1807.01547v1 [physics.flu-dyn] 4 Jul 2018




                                                  ABSTRACT
                                                       Researches on the impact of existing baffles on sloshing suppression of two-phase fluids in
                                                  storage tanks have been widely conducted in literature. However, few studies focus on the effect
                                                  of the baffles on self-pressurization or thermal stratification of the fluids in containers. This paper
                                                  uses Volume of Fluid (VOF) method to simulate the thermodynamic and fluid dynamic behavior of
                                                  liquid nitrogen in a tank with different baffle structures under microgravity environment. Groups
                                                  of gravity levels, fill levels and distances, angles and gaps of baffles, are compared and analyzed. Up
                                                  to 54% difference in pressurization can be observed by optimizing the baffle structure and metrics,
                                                  which is significant to achieve the highest performance of storage fluid control in the tank.

                                                      Keyword: Baffles, Self-pressurization, Thermal stratification, Microgravity


                                                  1    INTRODUCTION
                                                       Liquid hydrogen or oxygen fuel tanks are important parts in a space vehicle. Baffle structures
                                                  have been widely adopted to avoid liquid sloshing in these tanks no matter on ground in normal
                                                  gravity or on orbit in microgravity. The baffles are very effective in mitigating strong shaking of
                                                  liquid when the tank is impacted by a sudden external force. There are many experiments and
                                                  simulations performed in normal gravity.
                                                       Panzarella [1] states that researches on cryogenic fluid storage in tanks generally concern three
                                                  aspects: self-pressurization, fluid flow/convection and thermal stratification, and behavior and evo-
                                                  lution of liquid-vapor interface. Sloshing behavior in a tank has been studied since 1960s [2].
                                                  Chintalapati [3] found that baffles mitigate the peak slosh height and if there is a small hole on
                                                  baffle, the peak slosh height will increase 10-25%. Hasheminejad [4] [5]investigated the transverse
                                                  two-dimensional sloshing modes in both circular and elliptical tanks using a simple semi-analytic
                                                  approach based on linearized theory. The tank is partially filled and have a vertical baffle stand in
                                                  the bottom of the tank. Yoon [6] investigated effect of baffles on mitigating sloshing with arrays
                                                  of holes on the baffle. Behavior of propellant in a baffled tank in microgravity is attacking more
                                                  researchers’ concern, including NASA [7]. Kannapel [8] analyzed sloshing behavior of liquid oxygen
                                                  in space shuttle external tanks. All these researches shows the important roles of baffles in tank
                                                  design to reduce sloshing as well as mitigate impact force to the supporting structure of the tank.
                                                       Other than the conditions with acceleration, baffles could also be useful to stationary storage of
                                                  fluids in containers in perspective of hydrodynamics and thermodynamics. However, researches in


                                                                                                    1
                           Parameters              Group of setups
                          Gravity level        10 g0 , 10−3 g0 , 10−5 g0
                                                   −1

                            Fill level      30%, 40%, 50%, 55%, 60%, 70%
                           Distance(d)        0mm, 20mm, 40mm, 60mm
                          Orientation(θ)       105&75, 75&105, 90&90
                               Gap                0mm, 5mm, 10mm

                             Table 1: Simulations executed in this paper


this area is far more imperfect compared to dynamic study of baffles. Panzarella [1] systematically
presented an analysis of self-pressurization process of cryogenics in a tank in normal gravity. Behruzi
[9] studied the temperature difference during sloshing via both experiment and simulation, and bring
up a simplified model to describe heat transfer in sloshing. But his model did not include a baffle
structure. Ma [10] used CFD to investigate the no-vent filling process in a liquid hydrogen tank. Her
study shows that the mixing in microgravity is more adequate, and results in a more steady pressure
behavior. Adam [11] proposed a baffled tank used for aerial vehicles, whose baffles have multilayer
structure. He considered the heat leak to the tank, but failed to concern the effect of heat leak to
the fluid field in the tank. Grayson [12] conducted microgravity experiments on the effect of baffles
on the convection of the ullage in the tank on the AS-203 satellite, and found that the baffles can
promote vortex in the ullage of the tank by changing the velocity vector. He also emphasized that
the effect of natural convection cannot be ignored in microgravity, although it is on low level. To
our knowledge, there is a lack of investigation on how the baffles will affect the thermal stratification
or pressurization of fluid in the tank. This paper focuses on the effect of different distances, angles
and gaps of the baffles as well as the liquid fill levels and gravity levels on the temperature profiles
and self-pressurization behavior of nitrogen in microgravity environment. Performances of baffles
in different conditions are considered. A specialized structure can be constructed based on the
results to have the highest performance for pressure and velocity suppression, which can be helpful
in designing space cryogenic containers.


2     COMPUTATION MODEL
2.1    Setup
     The modeling tank is in cylindrical shape with diameter and height of 201 mm and 213 mm, re-
spectively, which is in accordance with the one without baffles from reference [13]. Simulations in 2D
are conducted in various gravity environments and gravity level set includes 10−5 g0 ,10−3 g0 ,10−1 g0 .
It is reasonable because the tank structure is symmetrical along its axis. Six different fill levels
are set to check the performance of baffles during the reduction of liquid. Annular plane baffles
are installed on the internal side of the tank as shown in Fig.1(a), where d is the distance between
two baffles. The baffles are configured in the forms of single baffle and twin baffles with different
included angles, where θ is the angle between baffles and tank wall. The parameters d, θ and gaps
are varied to optimize the highest performance for pressure and velocity suppression by the baffles.
All simulations in this paper are summarized in Table.1.
     VOF (Volume of Fluid) method is adopted to track the interface between liquid and gaseous ni-
trogen. Realizable k- model is used for the turbulence. This model adds mathematical restrictions


                                                   2
