                                                 Damping of liquid sloshing by foams


                                                 Damping of liquid sloshing by foams
                                                          A. Sauret,1, 2, a) F. Boulogne,1, b) J. Cappello,1, 3 E. Dressaire,1, 4 and H. A. Stone1, c)
                                                          1)
                                                             Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544,
                                                          USA
                                                          2)
                                                             Surface du Verre et Interfaces, UMR 125 CNRS/Saint-Gobain, 93303 Aubervilliers,
                                                          France.
                                                          3)
                                                             Ecole Normale Supérieure de Cachan, 94235 Cachan, France
                                                          4)
                                                             Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, New York University Polytechnic School of
                                                          Engineering, Brooklyn, NY 11201, USA
                                                          (Dated: 3 February 2015)
arXiv:1411.6542v2 [physics.flu-dyn] 1 Feb 2015




                                                          When a container is set in motion, the free surface of the liquid starts to oscillate or slosh. Such
                                                          effects can be observed when a glass of water is handled carelessly and the fluid sloshes or even spills
                                                          over the rims of the container. However, beer does not slosh as readily as water, which suggests that
                                                          foam could be used to damp sloshing. In this work, we study experimentally the effect on sloshing
                                                          of a liquid foam placed on top of a liquid bath. We generate a monodisperse two-dimensional liquid
                                                          foam in a rectangular container and track the motion of the foam. The influence of the foam on
                                                          the sloshing dynamics is experimentally characterized: only a few layers of bubbles are sufficient
                                                          to significantly damp the oscillations. We rationalize our experimental findings with a model that
                                                          describes the foam contribution to the damping coefficient through viscous dissipation on the walls
                                                          of the container. Then we extend our study to confined three-dimensional liquid foam and observe
                                                          that the behavior of 2D and confined 3D systems are very similar. Thus we conclude that only the
                                                          bubbles close to the walls have a significant impact on the dissipation of energy. The possibility
                                                          to damp liquid sloshing using foam is promising in numerous industrial applications such as the
                                                          transport of liquefied gas in tankers or for propellants in rocket engines.




                                                 I.   INTRODUCTION

                                                   Sloshing is the motion of the free surface of a liquid induced by variations of the velocity of the con-
                                                 tainer. The amplitude of the generated waves depends on the frequency and the amplitude of motion of the
                                                 container.1–9 When the frequency of the motion corresponds to the resonance frequency of the surface wave,
                                                 the amplitude increases significantly. If the amplitude of sloshing becomes large enough, spilling, splashing,
                                                 and/or drop formation are possible.10 Such phenomenon can lead to challenging technical constraints in
                                                 various applications including the transportation of oil and liquefied gas in tankers. Indeed, the sloshing dy-
                                                 namics leads to considerable pressure forces on the walls of a container and can be a source of destabilization
                                                 or failure of a container. Therefore, the characterization of the amplitude of the waves and the exploration of
                                                 mechanisms capable of damping sloshing is of critical importance. To damp sloshing, various methods have
                                                 been considered including the use of elastic membranes attached to the top of a container,11–13 or baffles
                                                 placed in a container.14,15 The use of containers with elastic walls was also considered.16 However, these
                                                 methods can be difficult to implement in large containers or require the design of new containers.
                                                   In the present paper, we study the damping effects of a liquid foam placed on top of the liquid. The present
                                                 method is versatile as it can be used in any container. Foam is easy to produce and cheap as it requires a
                                                 small quantity of foaming solution to generate a large volume of foam. In addition, foams are already used in
                                                 various industrial applications and processes such as oil recovery, soil remediation, fire containment or blast
                                                 wave mitigation.17,18
                                                   A foam, as used in the present study, is an assembly of densely packed bubbles produced upon aeration
                                                 of a surfactant solution. The flow of foam in two-dimensional channels has been studied extensively both


                                                 a) Electronic mail: alban.sauret@saint-gobain.com
                                                 b) A. Sauret and F. Boulogne contributed equally to this work.
                                                 c) Electronic mail: hastone@princeton.edu
Damping of liquid sloshing by foams                                                                           2


experimentally19–22 and numerically.23–25 Common foams exhibit viscous, elastic and/or plastic responses
depending on the external forcing.26–28 For small deformations, foams behave as visco-elastic solids.29 In
this regime, the effective viscosity of a foam is much larger than the viscosity of the foaming solution.30,31
Therefore, foam is a good candidate to damp sloshing and thus to decrease the pressure forces exerted on
the walls of a container.
   Since the seminal work of Bretherton on the motion of a bubble in a capillary,32 the viscous dissipation of a
flowing foam has been considered.33–38 It has been shown that the friction coefficient depends on the capillary
number (ratio of viscous forces to surface tension forces) but varies with the nature of the foam. For three-
dimensional foams, two sources of dissipation need to be taken into account. The first contribution is the
viscous friction induced by the displacement of the Plateau borders associated with the displacement of the
bubbles in contact with the walls of a container and relative to one another. The second contribution depends
on the interfacial rheology of the foam and is induced by the presence of surfactant molecules at air/liquid
interfaces.33,37 To characterize the relative magnitude of the different contributions, a distinction should be
made between low and high surface moduli. At high surface modulus, interfaces behave as incompressible
surfaces.39 In the present study, we rely on a foam with low surface modulus where the interfaces are elastic.
   In this paper, we study the damping effect of a foam placed on top of a liquid bath in an oscillating
rectangular container. In section II we begin by presenting the experimental setup, the physical properties of
the system and the two methods of excitation considered. Then, in section III we characterize the sloshing of a
single Newtonian fluid. We recall analytical results previously derived and validate the experimental approach.
We also introduce the damping coefficient 1/τ and provide a scaling law to rationalize the experimental
results. Section IV is devoted to the sloshing in presence of a layer of foam of varying thickness. We extend
our observations to three-dimensional foams and present a phenomenological model that predicts the damping
of the wave as a function of the foam thickness. We summarize our conclusions and discuss avenues for future
research in section V.


II.   EXPERIMENTAL METHODS

A.    Experimental setup

   To perform visualization of the different interfaces (liquid/air, liquid/foam, foam/air) and track the motion
of the foam, we use a rectangular cell in which the displacement of the fluid remains mainly two-dimensional.
The vertical walls of the container are made of borosilicate glass (purchased from Ted Pella and McMaster-
Carr) and a rigid rubber sheet (McMaster-Carr) is used to close the bottom of the cell. This configuration
allows the introduction of a needle at the center of the container to generate the monodisperse foam. The
cell has a length of L = 70 mm, a height of 92 mm and a varying width w ∈ [3; 19] mm. The experimental
apparatus, represented in figure 1(a), consists of a container, a LED panel and a high-speed camera mounted
on a moving stage. The moving stage is on rails and set in motion by a mechanical vibrator (LDS 319024-3)
controlled by a power supply (Stanford research system Model DS345) and an amplifier (LDS PA100E). The
lighting is provided by the LED panel (Phlox, 10 cm × 10 cm) placed behind the cell. The oscillations of the
liquid surface are recorded using a high-speed camera (Phantom V9.1) operating at typically 100 frames per
second. Examples of the visualizations are shown without and with foam, respectively, in figures 1(b) and
1(c).
   We first study the sloshing dynamics of a single Newtonian fluid. We use different fluids to vary the
viscosity, the density and the surface tension of the liquid. We compare the behavior of water, mixtures of
water and glycerol (50% v/v, 60% v/v and 80% v/v of glycerol), dodecane, decanol and a foaming solution
(described in detail in the next paragraph). We are therefore able to study how the physical parameters
of the system influence the sloshing dynamics of a single Newtonian fluid. The viscosity and the surface
tension of the Newtonian fluids are measured, respectively, with an Anton Paar rheometer (MCR 301, CC50
geometry) and the pendant drop method at 20o C and compared with tabulated values.40–42 The physical
properties of the different fluids used in this study are summarized in Table I.
   To perform sloshing experiments in the presence of foam, we partially fill the cell with a foaming solution
well above the critical micelle concentration (CMC). This solution is made of 90% v/v water, 5% v/v glyc-
erol and 5% v/v of commercial surfactant (Dawn dish-washing liquid, Procter & Gamble). The surfactant
