 Vibration Mitigation in Partially Liquid-Filled
          Vessel using Passive Energy Absorbers
                   Maor Farid1, Nissim Levy2 and Oleg Gendelman1,*
   1
       Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
                    2
                        Nuclear Research Center of the Negev (NRCN)

                 * - contacting author, e-mail:ovgend@tx.technion.ac.il




Keywords: Vibration Mitigation, Partially Liquid-Filled Vessel, Passive Energy
Absorber, Tuned Mass Damper, Nonlinear Energy Sink.




Abstract
This paper treats possible solutions for vibration mitigation in reduced-order model of
partially-filled liquid tank under impulsive forcing. Such excitation may lead to
hydraulic impacts applied on the tank inner walls. Finite stiffness of the tank walls is
taken into account. We explore both linear (Tuned Mass Damper) and nonlinear
(Nonlinear Energy Sink) passive vibration absorbers; mitigation performances are
examined numerically. The liquid sloshing mass is modeled by equivalent mass-
spring-dashpot system, which can both perform small-amplitude linear oscillations
and impact the vessel walls. We use parameters of the equivalent mass-spring-dashpot
system for well-explored case of cylindrical tanks. The hydraulic impacts are modeled
by high-power potential and dissipation functions. Critical location in the tank
structure is determined and expression of the corresponding local mechanical stress is
derived. We usefinite-elemet approach to assess the natural frequencies for specific
system parameters and to figure out possibilities for internal resonances. Numerical
evaluation criteria are suggested to determine the energy absorption performance.


                                            1
   1. Introduction
Vessels filled with liquid are used in many fields of engineering, including nuclear
[1], vehicle[2,3] and aerospace industries[4], for storage of chemicals, gasoline,
water, and different hazardous liquids[5]. External excitations may cause well-known
dynamical effect of liquid sloshing. This effect can take place in liquid cargo on
highways, cruises or in stationary vessels exposed to earthquake. Dynamic loads
related to the liquid sloshing may have direct and rather strong hazardous effect on the
vessel stability and robustness. Many methods of seismic analysis of tanks are
currently used by researchers and have been adopted by a number of industry
standards and guides such as ACI 350.3-06 and ACI 371R-08 covert seismic design,
which are based on the simplified methods evolved from earlier analytical work by
Housner 1960, A.S. Veletsos 1977-1984, M.A. Haroun 1981 and Shivakuinar 1997,
and others. Of these, the best known is Housner's pioneering work, published in the
early 1960s by the Atomic Energy Commission. Housner’s method was adopted by
many codes in the world and by a number of industry standards and has served as a
guideline for most seismic designs of liquid storage tanks. According to Housner's
theory, which is a simplified method of analysis, the tank deformation is negligible
with respect to the liquid motion. Hence, the analysis is taking into account only the
liquid motion relative to the tank and assuming that the tank motion is proportional to
the ground excitation. Housner observed that in certain parts of the tank structure, the
sloshing of the water was the dominant factor, whereas for other parts, the sloshing
had a small effect.

So far, detailed analytical solutions are limited to small-amplitude sloshing in
rectangular and cylindrical vessels. While being most interesting and potentially
hazardous, high-amplitude liquid sloshing in cylindrical tanks still lacks complete
analytic description. The reason is that the liquid in the tank is continuous system with
infinite number of degrees of freedom, and its boundary conditions on the free surface
are nonlinear and time-dependent. Nevertheless, loads created by high-amplitude
liquid sloshing are so crucial for designing the containing vessel, its supports and
payload limitations [6], that a number of approximate phenomenological models were
developed in order to get at least qualitative insight into this phenomenon.



                                           2
