                                                1




  Response Regimes in Equivalent Mechanical Model of Moderately
                              Nonlinear Liquid Sloshing
                                M. Farid* and O. V. Gendelman

        Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology

        *contacting author, maorfarid@gmail.com.

The paper considers non-stationary responses in reduced-order model (ROM) of partially
liquid-filled tank under external forcing. The model involves one common degree of freedom
for the tank and the non-sloshing portion of the liquid, and the other one – for the sloshing
portion of the liquid. The coupling between these degrees of freedom is nonlinear, with the
lowest-order potential dictated by symmetry considerations. Since the mass of the sloshing
liquid in realistic conditions does not exceed 10% of the total mass of the system, the
reduced-order model turns to be formally equivalent to well-studied oscillatory systems with
nonlinear energy sinks (NES). Exploiting this analogy, and applying the methodology known
from the studies of the systems with NES, we predict a multitude of possible nonstationary
responses in the considered ROM. These responses conform, at least on the qualitative level,
to the responses observed in experimental sloshing settings, multi-modal theoretical models
and full-scale numeric simulations.




    1. Introduction
Partially filled liquid storage tanks of different shapes are used in many fields of engineering ,
including vehicles, sea crafts, aircrafts, for the storage of various, maybe hazardous, liquids.
The term “sloshing” refers to oscillatory relative motion of the liquid with respect to the
containing vessel. The liquid sloshing may be hazardous for the vessel safety, since dynamic
loads related to the sloshing may have direct and rather strong calamitous effect on the vessel
stability and robustness.

While being most interesting and potentially hazardous, high-amplitude liquid sloshing in
partially filled vessels still lacks thorough analytic representation. The sloshing liquid has
infinite number of degrees of freedom; boundary conditions on the free surface are nonlinear
and time-dependent. Near a resonance,one can encounter high-amplitude steep sloshing
waves and hydraulic jumps. In the former case, nonlinear dynamical features may take place,
for example multiple periodic solutions ('jump' phenomenon) [1], weakly quasi-periodic [2],
                                                 2


[3] and strongly modulated responses [4]. Based on experimental results, it was pointed that
cubic spring seems to describe the dynamical regimes in the best way [5]. When the hydraulic
jumps are involved, significant hydraulic impacts are applied to the vessel inner walls [6].
Hydraulic jumps and wave collisions with the vessel shells express the strong non-linearities
in the system [7]–[10].

Dynamics of the liquid sloshing in partially filled vessels depends on the liquid depth. For
shallow free-surface, waves and hydraulic jumps show in vicinity of resonance and apply
high loads on vessel walls. Lepelletier and Raichlen [11] show that in rectangular tanks under
horizontal excitation experimental results are in good agreement with thelinear sloshing
theory. Forced sloshing and nonlinear resonance phenomena were studied by Moiseev [12].
However, as the excitation frequency approaches the natural frequency of the lowest sloshing
mode, nonlinear and dissipative theory must be used. Hydraulic jumps and wave collisions
with vessel shells are the source of strong nonlinearities in the system. Moreover, they can
cause significant local stresses in the containing structure and can affect the structure stability,
resistance and robustness.

Due to computational complexity and cumulative error originated in the complex interaction
between different bulks, the numerical solvers have limited ability to accurately describe the
loads caused by the fluid-structure interactions over long time intervals. That is the
motivation to look for analytical or semi-analytical methods. Comprehensive studies were
made to identify and predict nonlinear sloshing regimes that appear near the resonance, with
the help of asymptotic approaches. Most of those methods were based on assumptions of
smooth container inner walls, and neglected viscosity [7], [8], [11]. Therefore, potential flow
theory can be applied. In this work we focus on tanks with walls perpendicular to the
undisturbed liquid free surface. Even though steady-state asymptotic modal theory might have
a limited ability to quantitatively describe sloshing regimes in certain conditions (for example,
when water impact on the tank top takes place), it may be instrumental for analysis of the
moderately nonlinear responses, their stability and sensitivity to external perturbations.
Moreover, the major advantage of the reduced-order model (ROM) is very small
computational time compared to the CFD methods. Besides, the coupling between sloshing
and the containing structure due to stochastic external excitation can be analyzed for long
time intervals, and stability of the response regimes can be analyzed analytically.

Hill [13]and Hill and Frandsen [14] studied the wave height and nonlinear beating amplitude
by solving analytically the third-order amplitude evolution equation is in terms of Jacoby
elliptic functions and considering a single sloshing mode. Their solution is valid for finite
depth and non-breaking waves. Steady-state asymptotic modal theory succeeded to predict
