   Response Regimes in Equivalent Mechanical Model of Strongly

                           Nonlinear Liquid Sloshing

                           M. Farid and O. V. Gendelman*

    Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology

       *contacting author, ovgend@tx.technion.ac.il


Abstract

We consider equivalent mechanical model of liquid sloshing in partially-filled
cylindrical vessel both for free vibrations case and for horizontal harmonic ground
excitation. The model treats both the regime of linear sloshing, and strongly non-
linear sloshing regime; the latter is related to hydraulic impacts applied to the vessel
walls. These hydraulic impacts are commonly simulated with the help of high-power
potential and dissipation functions. For the sake of analytic exploration, we substitute
this traditional approach by treatment of an idealized vibro-impact system with
velocity-dependent restitution coefficient. Parameters of the vibro-impact model are
derived from the high-power potential and dissipation functions. The obtained
reduced model is similar to recently explored system of linear primary oscillator with
attached vibro-impact energy sink. Analysis is based on a multiple – scale approach;
the ratio of modal mass of the first sloshing mode to the total mass of the liquid and
the tank serves as a natural small parameter. In the case of external ground forcing,
steady-state responses and chaotic strongly modulated responses are revealed.
Besides, the system response to horizontal periodic excitation with additional
Gaussian white noise, and corresponding dynamics on the slow invariant manifold are
explored. All analytical predictions of the reduced vibro-impact model are validated
against direct numerical simulations of “initial” equivalent model with high-power
smooth potential and dissipation functions, and good agreement is observed.




                                           1
1.     Introduction

Cylindrical vessels filled with liquid are used in many fields of engineering, including
nuclear, vehicle and aerospace industries, for storage of chemicals, gasoline, water,
and other possibly hazardous liquids. Oscillations of the liquid in the vessel (liquid
sloshing) may be dangerous for the vessel safety. So far, detailed analytical
explorations are limited to small-amplitude sloshing in rectangular and cylindrical
vessels. While being most interesting and potentially hazardous, high-amplitude
liquid sloshing in cylindrical tanks still lacks complete analytic description. High-
amplitude sloshing can cause hydraulic jumps. In this case major hydraulic impacts
can act on the vessel structure walls [1]. Hydraulic jumps and wave collisions with
vessel shells are the source of strong non-linearities in the system.

In this paper we adopt the equivalent mechanical model of the high-amplitude
sloshing. This well-known model simulates the effects of hydraulic impacts with the
help of    high-order smooth potential and damping functions [2–4], following
Pilipchuk and Ibrahim [5]. These functions are suitable for numeric simulations, but
hardly applicable for analytic treatment. In order to pursue the analytic approach, we
further simplify the model and substitute the high-order potential and damping
functions by inelastic vibro-impact interactions. So, the resulting model includes both
linear coupling and the vibro—impact constraints. In many previous studies the
impact-induced dissipation was modeled by Newton method, which invokes
traditional constant restitution coefficient [6,7]. However, this assumption is not valid
for high impact velocities [8], and, of course, not for fluids. In the current work we
demonstrate that the high-power potential and damping model allows extension of the
Newton approach. The effective restitution coefficient can be expressed as a function
of impact velocity, material properties and tank geometry. Under these assumptions,
the model turns out to be treatable analytically, similarly to recently explored
dynamics of linear oscillator with attached vibro—impact nonlinear energy sink
[7,9,10]. To validate the results, direct numeric simulations with high-power potential
and damping functions are used.

In traditional phenomenological models, the sloshing dynamics in a partially-filled
liquid tank is modeled by a mass-spring-dashpot system or a pendulum, when each
sloshing mode is modeled by a different modal mass. One can easily understand that

                                            2
