Internal resonances and dynamic responses in equivalent mechanical
                     model of partially liquid-filled vessel

                            M. Farid and O. V. Gendelman*

    Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology

       *contacting author, ovgend@tx.technion.ac.il


Abstract
The paper treats oscillations of a liquid in partially filled vessel under horizontal
harmonic ground excitation. Such excitation may lead to hydraulic impacts. The
liquid sloshing mass is modeled by equivalent pendulum, which can impact the vessel
walls. We use parameters of the equivalent pendulum for well-explored case of
cylindrical vessels. The hydraulic impacts are modeled by high-power potential
function. Conditions for internal resonances are presented. A non-resonant behavior
and dynamic response related to 3:1 internal resonance are explored. When the
excitation amplitude exceeds a critical value, the system exhibits multiple steady state
solutions. Quasi-periodic solutions appear in relatively narrow range of parameters.
Numerical continuation links between resonant regimes found asymptotically for
small excitation amplitude, and high-amplitude responses with intensive impacts.


   1. Introduction
Vessels filled with liquid are used in many fields of engineering, including nuclear
[1], vehicle [2,3] and aerospace industries [4], for storage of chemicals, gasoline,
water, and various hazardous liquids [5]. External excitations may cause well-known
dynamical effect of liquid sloshing. This effect can take place in liquid cargo on
highways, cruises or in stationary vessels exposed to earthquakes. Dynamic loads
related to the liquid sloshing may have direct and rather strong hazardous effect on the
vessel stability and robustness.

   So far, detailed analytical explorations are limited to small-amplitude sloshing in
rectangular and cylindrical vessels. While being most interesting and potentially
hazardous, high-amplitude liquid sloshing in cylindrical tanks still lacks complete
analytic description. The reason is that the liquid in the tank is continuous system with

                                           1
infinite number of degrees of freedom, and its boundary conditions on the free surface
are nonlinear and time-dependent. Nevertheless, loads created by high-amplitude
liquid sloshing are so crucial for designing the containing vessel, its supports and
payload limitations [6], that a number of approximate phenomenological models were
suggested in order to get at least qualitative insight into this phenomenon.

    In one of the most well-known phenomenological models, the sloshing dynamics
in a partially-filled liquid tank with total mass M is modeled by a pendulum with mass
m, length of l, and a rotational coordinate  with respect to the vessel center-line. In
this simplified model, three dynamic regimes can take place, as shown in Pilipchuk
and Ibrahim[7] and presented in Fig. 1:




              a)                                  b)




                                 c)

Fig. 1. Regimes of liquid free-surface motion and their equivalent mechanical models.




    (a) The liquid free surface performs small oscillations around its trivial stable
        equilibrium and remains planar. This regime can be successfully described by
        a pendulum performing small oscillations.
    (b) Relatively large oscillations in which the liquid free surface does not remain
        planar. This motion is described by a differential equation with weak
        nonlinearity, and can be treated by perturbation methods [7–9]. In this regime
        the “equivalent” spherical pendulum is considered to perform moderate


                                                  2
