                                                   Mechanical energy dissipation induced by sloshing and wave breaking in a fully coupled angular
                                                           motion system. Part I: Theoretical formulation and Numerical investigation.
                                                                                                                    B. Bouscasse∗
                                                                                                                      CNR-INSEAN
                                                                                                 Marine Technology Research Institute, Rome, Italy and
                                                                                                          Aeronautics Department (ETSIA),
                                                                                              Technical University of Madrid (UPM), 28040 Madrid, Spain

                                                                                                                    A. Colagrosssi†
                                                                                                                   CNR-INSEAN
                                                                                                   Marine Technology Research Institute, Rome, Italy
arXiv:1307.6064v2 [physics.flu-dyn] 1 Apr 2014




                                                                                                    A. Souto-Iglesias‡ and J. L. Cercos-Pita§
                                                                                                       Naval Architecture Department (ETSIN),
                                                                                              Technical University of Madrid (UPM), 28040 Madrid, Spain
                                                                                                               (Dated: August 25, 2021)
                                                                     A dynamical system involving a driven pendulum filled with liquid, is analyzed in the present paper series.
                                                                  The study of such a system is conducted in order to understand energy dissipation resulting from the shallow
                                                                  water sloshing and induced wave breaking. This analysis is relevant for the design of Tuned Liquid Damper
                                                                  devices. The complexity and violence of the flow generated by the roll motion results in the impossibility of
                                                                  using an analytical approach, requiring in turn the use of a suitable numerical solver. In Part I, the coupled
                                                                  dynamical system is thoroughly described, revealing its nonlinear features associated with the large amplitude
                                                                  of the forcing, both in terms of mechanical and fluid dynamical aspects. A smoothed particle hydrodynamics
                                                                  (SPH) model, largely validated in literature, is used to calculate the frequency behavior of the whole system.
                                                                  For small rotation angles, a semi-analytical model of the energy dissipated by the fluid, based on a hydraulic
                                                                  jump solution, is developed; the energy transfer is numerically calculated in order to extend the analysis to large
                                                                  oscillation angles. The experimental part of the investigation is carried out in Part II of this work.

                                                                  PACS numbers: 47.11.-j, 47.15.-x, 47.10.ad
                                                                  Keywords: sloshing, dissipation, breaking waves, viscous effects, TLD, Tuned Liquid Dampers, TSD, Tuned Sloshing
                                                                  Dampers, Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics, shallow water




                                                                                                               I.   INTRODUCTION

                                                    The present work deals with energy dissipation induced by sloshing in a fully coupled angular motion system. The
                                                 investigation is completed by the experimental study of Part II [1].
                                                    In recent decades, a certain amount of studies have been dedicated to the damping/suppression of unwanted oscillations. This
                                                 is especially true for civil infrastructures such as large buildings or bridges for which some mechanical damping systems for
                                                 structural vibration control have also been devised [2]. Among them, Tuned Liquid Dampers (TLD) (see left sketch of Fig. I)
                                                 exploit the liquid sloshing motion in a tank in order to counteract the external forces and dissipate energy. These dampers can
                                                 be used to control a building’s motion during earthquakes and strong winds [3, 4], motion instabilities in spacecrafts [5, 6] and
                                                 the rolling motion in ships [7–9].
                                                    The topic is receiving nowadays substantial attention in countries like Japan, where a campaign to install dampers in existing
                                                 buildings is ongoing [10]. The extra weight due to the damper, to be added to a building commonly on its top floors, often requires
                                                 extremely expensive reinforcement of the building structure. For example, as reported in the media, adding mass dampers to
                                                 the Shinjuku Mitsui Building in Tokyo has been budgeted in USD 51 million. Enhancing the effectiveness of dampers, while
                                                 keeping their weight low, becomes thus extremely important from the economic point of view.
                                                    With all these motivations, and concentrating on the TLD concept, several investigations have been performed over the years
                                                 in an attempt to reproduce sloshing flows. The first studies were performed using a potential flow linear or non-linear theory,



                                                 ∗ Electronic address: benjamin.bouscasse@cnr.it
                                                 † Electronic address: andrea.colagrossi@cnr.it
                                                 ‡ Electronic address: antonio.souto@upm.es
                                                 § Electronic address: jl.cercos@upm.es
                                                                                                                                   2

but later studies were conducted using CFD. Abundant sources can be found in the books of Faltinsen and Timokha [11] and
Ibrahim [12].
   Modeling the energy dissipation in sloshing has always been a challenge. As an example, in order to take into account the
viscosity effects and the boundary layers, some formulae for dissipation have to be added to potential flow based or shallow-
water based models. In 1983, Demirbilek treated this problem of dissipation in sloshing waves both theoretically and numerically
[13–15] considering the full Navier Stokes equations. This allowed him to obtain some results regarding the influence of both
Froude and Reynolds numbers on the dissipation values, but without any validation.
   Sun and Fujino [16] performed a numerical and experimental analysis of the problem in a tank without immersed screens
or structures. They identified the breaking as an important source of dissipation and determined a semi-analytical procedure
to take it into account. Reed et al. [17] investigated in greater detail the effects of large amplitude sloshing on a TLD. Marsh
et al. [18] performed experimental and numerical works regarding the analysis of dissipation mechanisms in egg-shaped sloshing
absorbers, focusing on sloshing and solid boundary layer effects. From a physical point of view, the study of the dissipation
induced by a free-surface flow is arduous, especially in the presence of a wave breaking flow. Perlin et al. [19] presented a review
and analysis on works dedicated to dissipation under wave breaking.
   Cooker [20, 21] performed elegant decay experiments with a free oscillating tank suspended as a bifilar pendulum in the
shallow-water limit, suggesting that hydraulic jump theory can provide some insight into the dissipation mechanisms. The
transfer of energy between a moving vessel and the contained fluid is studied in Turner and Bridges [22].
   The calculation of resonance properties for a coupled system is often difficult in the presence of a liquid. For that, different
techniques have been developed in order to model the sloshing flow and solve the coupled problem, namely Yu et al. [23] and
Tait [24] using a mass-spring subsystem, Frandsen [25] using potential flow theory and Ardakani and Bridges [26], Ardakani
et al. [27] using shallow water equations.




FIG. 1: Sketch of the two dynamical systems TLD (left) and HMLD (right) from [28]. The aim is to dampen the motion of M induced by an
external acceleration Ae .

   Recently, an alternative TLD configuration defined as a hybrid mass liquid damper (HMLD) (see [28] and Fig. I, right) was
introduced.
   The idea is to tune the mass damper Mh to maximize the force counteraction between the primary and secondary structures
and to attach a sloshing damper to the mass damper in order to dissipate large amounts of energy through violent sloshing. An
optimally designed HMLD configuration is shown to be more effective as a control device than the standard TLD configuration
since it maximizes the force counteracting and dissipating effects.
   In the present work, a specially devised fully coupled damper system first described in Bulian et al. [29], called hereinafter
Pendulum-TLD, is analyzed. The mechanical system is essentially a non-linear driven pendulum, where the pendulum is a
rectangular tank rotating around a fixed pivot. With the tank partially filled with a liquid, energy is supplied to the whole system
by a mass sliding along a linear guide fixed on the tank. The mechanical system and the resulting sloshing flow are coupled in a
very complex non-linear manner.
   Part I is organized as follows: first, the frame of reference, notation and elements of the coupled system are presented, the
torques and main energy terms affecting the dynamics are identified and an analogy with TLD and HMLD systems is provided.
The dynamics of the empty tank is then described prior to developing the theoretical model representing the fluid action. The
loads of the fluid on the tank during sloshing are theoretically and numerically investigated by varying both the frequency and
