                                                   Mechanical energy dissipation induced by sloshing and wave breaking in a fully coupled angular
                                                                        motion system. Part II: Experimental Investigation.
                                                                                                                    B. Bouscasse∗
                                                                                                                      CNR-INSEAN
                                                                                                 Marine Technology Research Institute, Rome, Italy and
                                                                                                          Aeronautics Department (ETSIA),
                                                                                              Technical University of Madrid (UPM), 28040 Madrid, Spain

                                                                                                                    A. Colagrosssi†
                                                                                                                   CNR-INSEAN
                                                                                                   Marine Technology Research Institute, Rome, Italy
arXiv:1307.6063v2 [physics.flu-dyn] 1 Apr 2014




                                                                                                    A. Souto-Iglesias‡ and J. L. Cercos-Pita§
                                                                                                       Naval Architecture Department (ETSIN),
                                                                                              Technical University of Madrid (UPM), 28040 Madrid, Spain
                                                                                                                 (Dated: July 26, 2021)
                                                                     In Part I of this paper series, a theoretical and numerical model for a a driven pendulum filled with liquid was
                                                                  developed. The system was analyzed in the framework of tuned liquid dampers (TLD) and hybrid mass liquid
                                                                  dampers (HMLD) theory. In this Part II, in order to measure the energy dissipation resulting from shallow water
                                                                  sloshing, an experimental investigation is conducted. Accurate evaluations of energy transfers are obtained
                                                                  through the recorded kinematics of the system. A set of experiments is conducted with three different liquids:
                                                                  water, sunflower oil and glycerine. Coherently with the results of Part I, the energy dissipation obtained when
                                                                  the tank is filled with water can mainly be explained by the breaking waves. For all three liquids, the effects of
                                                                  varying the external excitation amplitude are discussed.

                                                                  PACS numbers: 47.11.-j, 47.15.-x, 47.10.ad
                                                                  Keywords: sloshing flows, dissipation, breaking waves, viscous effects, TLD, Tuned Liquid Dampers, Smoothed Particle
                                                                  Hydrodynamics, shallow water




                                                                                                               I.   INTRODUCTION

                                                    A theoretical and numerical model for a fully coupled dynamical system, called hereinafter Pendulum-TLD, has been
                                                 developed in Part I [? ] of the present work. The mechanical system is essentially a non-linear driven pendulum, where
                                                 the pendulum is a rectangular tank rotating around a fixed pivot. The tank, partially filled with a liquid, receives torque from a
                                                 mass sliding along a linear guide fixed to the tank. This torque is the external excitation for the system motion. Analogies with
                                                 a tuned liquid damper (TLD) and a hybrid mass liquid dampers (HMLD) have been provided in Part I. in order to validate the
                                                 models developed in Part I and to provide insight into energy dissipation mechanisms in sloshing dampers with a focus on wave
                                                 breaking influence, an experimental investigation is conducted in this Part II .
                                                    Much work has been done in order to assess the sloshing related loads that occur during forced harmonic motions (see e.g.
                                                 ? ? ? ]). Concerning the coupling between a mechanical system and fluid dynamics, one of the most interesting experimental
                                                 work is due to ? ] who carried out decay experiments with a free oscillating tank suspended as a bifilar pendulum in the shallow-
                                                 water limit. The most attractive feature of this system is that friction effects are negligible. ? ] also tested several shapes for a
                                                 free swaying tank. ? ? ] present other decay tests with egg shaped forms, claiming that they are close to optimum in motion
                                                 dampening for a range of filling heights.
                                                    Experiments for coupled roll motion in waves are found in e.g. ? ? ]. The effects of screens and baffles placed inside the tank,
                                                 have been studied experimentally in the works of e.g. [? ? ? ]. The extra dissipation is achieved when viscous boundary layers
                                                 separate from the many solid edges of a screen. There is a rapid generation of vorticity, and therefore an associated high rate of
                                                 dissipation of mechanical energy by the viscous forces. ? ] carried out experimental tests to assess the efficiency of a rolling and



                                                 ∗ Electronic address: benjamin.bouscasse@cnr.it
                                                 † Electronic address: andrea.colagrossi@cnr.it
                                                 ‡ Electronic address: antonio.souto@upm.es
                                                 § Electronic address: jl.cercos@upm.es
                                                                                                                                  2




                                             FIG. 1: Tank dimensions and sliding device


translating tank to dampen external vibrations. They performed a frequency analysis of the device, testing different filling levels
and liquids with different viscosities.
   In the present paper, the Pendulum-TLD, described in Part I [? ] and in [? ], is experimentally studied. Only one frequency of
excitation is considered, forcing the system to roll at the mechanical linear resonant frequency (see discussion in Part I). In the
designed system, forces and energy are retrieved from kinematic quantities. This avoids the use of sensors for the measurement
of force and torque which introduces practical difficulties and measurement uncertainties. The accuracy of these results could
make this work interesting for the validation of numerical models as well as to provide useful information for TLD or HMLD
designers.
   In order to investigate viscosity effects, three fluids are considered: water, sunflower oil and glycerine. They have a similar
density but a very different viscosity. Using these three liquids makes possible the investigation of the influence of Reynolds
number for both the time-periodic state dissipation and the transient dynamics of the motion. Particular attention is given to the
dissipation linked to wave breaking.
   This Part II paper is organized as follows: the second section is dedicated to the experimental setup, the third section presents
experimental results for the empty tank, and in the fourth the results for water are discussed. This is a relevant case since it
is the closest to an inviscid case, for which a theoretical model was developed in Part I. In the fifth section, results for more
viscous liquids are analyzed. A summary of the energy dissipation measurements is presented considering the scales developed
in Part I. Finally, a novel damping device, the hybrid pendulum mass liquid damper (HPMLD), is discussed before presenting
conclusions.
   This case is a benchmark for the SPHERIC SPH community and all data is available for reanalysis by third parties. See
supplemental material at [URL will be inserted by AIP] for videos of the experiments. Watching them across together with
reading the paper is recommendable.


                                                  II.   EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

   The experiments were conducted with the tank testing device of the CEHINAV - UPM research group. It is a single degree of
freedom angular motion sloshing rig used for a number of experimental campaigns documented in the literature, e.g. [? ? ? ?
] and described thoroughly in [? ]. The tank chosen for the simulations is depicted with its dimensions in Fig. 1. In particular,
the tank length L is 0.90 m, and the width B is 0.062 m. The length l = 0.1 m is defined as a characteristic length of the system,
indeed, the filling height adopted will be of this magnitude (almost shallow water regime) as well as the amplitude of the sliding
mass motion. The distance H between the center of rotation and the tank bottom is set equal to 0.47 m. The rotation center is
above the center of gravity of the whole system, implying that the system is stable at the equilibrium position.
   The tank is intentionally narrow along the z-direction, i.e. the direction perpendicular to the paper, in comparison with
the horizontal and vertical dimensions, in order to have a predominantly two dimensional flow. A 0.60 m long linear guide
is mounted parallel to the tank bottom passing though the rotation center. A controllable electrical engine slides a mass,
m = 4.978 kg, along the guide with a specified motion. The weight and inertia of the mass generates a torque that acts as
the external excitation to the system, and gives energy to the tank, which begins to roll. Consequently, sloshing is induced and
influences the dynamics of the rigid body angular motion.
   The sloshing tank rotates on a fixed plane around the fixed pivot O. The moment of inertia around O is I0 = 26.9 kg.m2 and
the static moment of the rigid system around O is S G = mtank ηG = −29.2kg.m. The sliding mass moves with a defined harmonic
