                                                 Surface wave dynamics in orbital shaken cylindrical containers
                                                       M. Reclari,1 M. Dreyer,1 S. Tissot,2 D. Obreschkow,3 F. M. Wurm,2 and M. Farhat1
                                                       1)
                                                            EPFL, Laboratoire des Machines Hydrauliques, 1007 Lausanne,
                                                       Switzerland
                                                       2)
                                                            EPFL, Laboratory of Cellular Biotechnology, 1015 Lausanne,
                                                       Switzerland
arXiv:1412.0919v1 [physics.flu-dyn] 2 Dec 2014




                                                       3)
                                                            International Centre for Radio Astronomy Research (ICRAR), M468,
                                                       University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Hwy, Crawley, WA 6009,
                                                       Australia

                                                       Be it to aerate a glass of wine before tasting, to accelerate a chemical reaction or to
                                                       cultivate cells in suspension, the “swirling” (or orbital shaking) of a container ensures
                                                       good mixing and gas exchange in an efficient and simple way. Despite being used
                                                       in a large range of applications this intuitive motion is far from being understood
                                                       and presents a richness of patterns and behaviors which has not yet been reported.
                                                       The present research charts the evolution of the waves with the operating parameters
                                                       identifying a large variety of patterns, ranging from single and multiple crested waves
                                                       to breaking waves. Free surface and velocity fields measurements are compared to
                                                       a potential sloshing model, highlighting the existence of various flow regimes. Our
                                                       research assesses the importance of the modal response of the shaken liquids, laying
                                                       the foundations for a rigorous mixing optimization of the orbital agitation in its
                                                       applications.



                                                       Copyright (2014) American Institute of Physics. This article may be downloaded for personal use

                                                       only. Any other use requires prior permission of the author and the American Institute of Physics.




                                                       The following article appeared in Physics of Fluids 26, 052104 (2014) and may be found at http:

                                                       // scitation. aip. org/ content/ aip/ journal/ pof2/ 26/ 5/ 10. 1063/ 1. 4874612 .




                                                                                                 1
                          M. Reclari et.al., Phys. Fluids 26, 052104 (2014).


I.    INTRODUCTION


     The “orbital shaking” is the displacement of a container, maintaining a fixed orientation
with respect to an inertial frame of reference, along a circular trajectory at a constant angular
velocity. This motion is used in many applications, ranging from wine swirling for tasting
purposes to biological and chemical industrial applications, e.g. bacterial1 and more recently
cellular cultures2 . Cells are cultivated in suspensions of liquid medium, where they multiply
and produce the required protein. The motion of the liquid guarantees the suspension and
homogenizes the concentration of cells consumables (oxygen and nutrient) and products
(proteins and carbon dioxide). Although at large scale this is usually achieved using stirred
tanks, where the agitation is provided by an impeller and the aeration by oxygen spargers
from the container bottom3 , it was found that bursting of bubbles at the free surface4 and
excessive shear stresses5,6 may damage the cells. These reasons kindled the interest in the
use of large scale orbital shaken devices up to thousand liters7–9 . Thus, a large number of
researches have been performed on the gas exchange10–13 , mixing14–17 and volumetric power
consumption18 of the bioreactors. In some cases, correlations have been proposed in order
to quantify the variation of those quantities during scale-up of the culture size. Although
few studies focused on the measurement of the velocity fields19,20 , no significant effort has
been dedicated so far to the understanding of the motion of the liquid carrying the cells,
and of its influence on the scaling of the cultures.

     On the other hand, the physics of free surface liquids in laterally shaken containers has
been extensively studied, especially from the analytical point of view, with potential flows
theory (inviscid, incompressible and irrotational)21 . Early works focused on sloshing of
spacecraft propellent in cylindrical22,23 , conical24 or rectangular tanks25 , while more recent
investigations involved the transport of liquids in naval carriers26,27 . Moreover, swirling and
unsteady flow regimes have been observed in linear forced sloshing at shaking frequencies
close to the first natural frequency28,29 . Extensive study determined the stability regions of
those flows26,30,31 , while the persistence of swirling regime due to orbital shaking has also
been investigated32 . Surprisingly, the hydrodynamics generated by orbital excitation and its
application for mixing and oxygenation purposes received little attention so far. This work
bridges the gap between the biological and hydrodynamic fields of investigation, explicitly
establishing a potential model for the case of orbital shaken liquids. We also conducted an

                                                  2
