                                                        Extension of the consistent δ + -SPH model for
                                                       multiphase flows considering the compressibility of
                                                                        different phases
arXiv:2505.10215v1 [physics.flu-dyn] 15 May 2025




                                                    Xiao-Ting Huanga,, Peng-Nan Suna , Hong-Guan Lyua , Andrea Colagrossib ,
                                                                                A-Man Zhangc
                                                     a School of Ocean Engineering and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China
                                                    b Institute of Marine Engineering (INM), National Research Council (CNR), Rome, Italy
                                                      c College of Shipbuilding Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, China




                                                   Abstract
                                                   In hydrodynamic problems involving wave impact on structures, air compress-
                                                   ibility is crucial for accurate pressure prediction when an air bubble is entrapped.
                                                   In this work, the consistent δ + -SPH model, originally developed for single-phase
                                                   scenarios, is extended to multiphase contexts. Although the consistent δ + -SPH
                                                   model shows good performance for single phase and viscous flow simulations,
                                                   extending it to multiphase scenarios presents challenges, such as proper im-
                                                   plementation of particle shifting for multiphase interfaces. Therefore, within
                                                   the framework of the consistent δ + -SPH, we introduce the following enhance-
                                                   ments: firstly, new strategy for handling δu-terms given by the particle shift-
                                                   ing technique at multiphase interfaces are proposed to maintain stability and
                                                   conservation. Secondly, for modeling of incompressible phases, like water, an
                                                   acoustic damper term is introduced to alleviate acoustic waves resulting from
                                                   the weakly-compressible assumption, which is expected to achieve smooth pres-
                                                   sure field comparable to truly-incompressible hypothesis, thereby reducing the
                                                   nonphysical pressure wave during the violent impact state; for modeling com-
                                                   pressible phases like air, a physical sound speed is adopted in the equation of
                                                   state to accurately model real gas phase compressibility. To test and validate
                                                   the present multiphase SPH model, simulations were conducted for six scenar-
                                                   ios. In particular, except for sloshing with two-layer liquids, the other scenarios
                                                   fully consider air pressure oscillations when air is entrapped, compressed, or
                                                   expanded by surrounding flows. The results demonstrate significant advantages
                                                   of the present SPH model in simulating multiphase problems involving strong
                                                   liquid impact and different phase compressibility.
                                                   Keywords: Multiphase, Particle shifting, δ + -SPH, Compressible flow



                                                      Email address: sunpn@mail.sysu.edu.cn (Peng-Nan Sun)




                                                   Submitted to Journal Computational Physics     04 November 2024, Accepted 22 April 2025
1. Introduction

    The study of multiphase flows is essential in both scientific and engineering
domains, attracting significant attention from scholars in recent years [1, 2].
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) has emerged as a valuable approach for
studying multiphase flow problems. However, due to the unavoidable discon-
tinuous characteristics such as density, and physical interactions at the phase
interfaces, Eulerian mesh-based methods face inherent challenges. In this re-
gard, Lagrangian particle methods stand out for their ability to handle complex
interfaces and multiphase flows with deformations without requiring additional
numerical treatments for interface tracking [3, 4, 5, 6]. Among these methods,
Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) is extensively applied in simulating
multiphase flows [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13].
    Previous studies on multiphase flow models, such as water-gas phase models,
often assume that both water and gas are incompressible, as seen in VOF-based
methods (see e.g., [14]) and level-set methods (see e.g., [15]). However, in sce-
narios involving violent free surface flows, such as wave impacts on structures or
sloshing, air entrainment or water-air mixing can lead to compression and expan-
sion of the air phase, resulting in pressure changing rapidly and with long-term
oscillation [16, 17, 18, 19]. Hence, it is crucial to consider the compressibility of
different phases when studying such multiphase flow problems.
    Multiphase SPH schemes can be categorized according to how pressure is
solved, leading to two main approaches: Weakly Compressible SPH (WCSPH)
[20, 21] and Incompressible SPH (ISPH) [22, 23, 24]. In the WCSPH framework,
the pressure is explicitly solved based on the Equation of State (EOS), making
it well suited for compressible multiphase flow problems, while the ISPH model
solves the pressure implicitly via the Poisson equation, which poses challenges
for handling strongly compressible flows [25, 26, 27]. Additionally, the ISPH
scheme also faces difficulties in parallelization [28], while the WCSPH scheme is
well suited for multi-GPU simulations [29]. In this study, the WCSPH scheme is
chosen because of its ability to handle the compressibility of fluid phases while
naturally satisfying the free surface condition [30].
    Within the context of WCSPH multiphase flows, two main challenges we
discuss in the present work are: (i) numerical instability, such as pressure in-
stability, particle penetration at phase interfaces; and (ii) modeling the com-
pressibility of different fluid phases. Various approaches have been proposed to
tackle the two challenges, which are discussed below.
    Pressure instability at multiphase interfaces is often attributed to density
discontinuity. To address this issue, particular attention is paid to the treatment
of density. Hu et al. [31] used the summation of density to obtain smoothed
pressure field for multiphase SPH scheme, but under the assumption of uniform
particle distribution. Furthermore, it does not work for free-surface problems
due to the truncation of the kernel support. Another approach for density
evaluation is using the continuity equation, which has been widely used and well-
supported by numerical techniques. For example, Colagrossi and Landrini [32]
used moving-least-squares (MLS) interpolation to frequently reinitialize density


                                         2
