                                         A Machine Learning-based Characterization Framework
                                          for Parametric Representation of Nonlinear Sloshing
                                                       Xihaier Luoa,∗, Ahsan Kareemb , Liting Yub , Shinjae Yooa
                                         a
                                            Computational Science Initiative, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973,
arXiv:2201.11663v1 [cs.LG] 25 Jan 2022




                                                                               United States.
                                         b
                                           NatHaz Modeling Laboratory, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, United
                                                                                  States.




                                         Abstract
                                         The growing interest in creating a parametric representation of liquid sloshing
                                         inside a container stems from its practical applications in modern engineer-
                                         ing systems. The resonant excitation, on the other hand, can cause unstable
                                         and nonlinear water waves, resulting in chaotic motions and non-Gaussian
                                         signals. This paper presents a novel machine learning-based framework for
                                         nonlinear liquid sloshing representation learning. The proposed method is
                                         a parametric modeling technique that is based on sequential learning and
                                         sparse regularization. The dynamics are categorized into two parts: linear
                                         evolution and nonlinear forcing. The former advances the dynamical system
                                         in time on an embedded manifold, while the latter causes divergent behav-
                                         iors in temporal evolution, such as bursting and switching. The proposed
                                         framework’s merit is demonstrated using an experimental dataset of liquid
                                         sloshing in a tank under horizontal excitation with a wide frequency range
                                         and various vertical slat screen settings.
                                         Keywords: Sparse Regression, Nonlinear System Identification, Time-delay
                                         Embedding, Liquid sloshing, Non-Gaussian Signals


                                         1. Introduction
                                            Sloshing liquid in a partially filled tank is a source of concern in many
                                         engineering fields [1, 2]. When the external excitation amplitude is large,

                                             ∗
                                                 Corresponding author.
                                                 Email address: xluo@bnl.gov (Xihaier Luo)


                                         Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                      January 28, 2022
or the excitation frequency is close to the natural sloshing frequencies, an
unrestrained free liquid surface is prone to violent wave motions. Excessive
water motions escalate the hydrodynamic forces acting on the tank walls,
resulting in severe structural damage, for instance, an oil leak or gas explo-
sion [3]. Vertical slat screens are one of the devices developed to suppress
resonantly forced sloshing. These perforated plate-based screens effectively
provide efficient wave damping by promoting vortexes in water motions and
dissipating energy via turbulence cascade. Understanding and mastering the
fundamental principles governing liquid-plate interactions is a necessary first
step toward the development of the next generation of offshore platforms,
gas containers, and other naval systems [4, 5, 6, 7, 8].
     Partial differential equations (PDEs) are frequently used to describe the
principles that govern physical systems in the modern world. These specified
PDEs, also known as governing equations, aid in the establishment of scien-
tific fields and the rapid advancement of technology. In the context of liquid
sloshing, potential flow theory was used to simulate small-amplitude sloshing
motion in a regular-configuration container [9, 10]. The Laplace equation was
later used to analyze nonlinear sloshing problems in two/three dimensions for
more turbulent scenarios. When solved using the finite element method or
the boundary element method, the computed results can capture free surface
sloshing motions in various liquid storage tanks [11, 12, 13]. Another possibil-
ity is to use Navier Stokes equations to solve the problem. To simulate viscous
liquid sloshing in a baffled tank with possibly broken free surfaces, several
turbulence models, including Reynolds averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) and
large-eddy simulation (LES), were evaluated [14, 15, 16]. However, when
large amplitude sloshing occurs traditional finite element-based methods fre-
quently fail to provide accurate results. To address this issue, advanced
numerical methods such as arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian elements [17, 18]
and smoothed particle hydrodynamics [19, 20] are introduced, where the for-
mer focuses on maintaining a high-quality mesh throughout an analysis when
large deformation occurs and the latter is meshless and uses a collection of
pseudo-particles to represent a given body. While knowing these equations
and using advanced numerical methods allow us to simulate liquid sloshing
in a variety of tanks, reliable and high-fidelity PDE-governed models remain
elusive in many tank and baffle settings.
     Fortunately, the unprecedented availability of data today promises a re-
naissance in the analysis and understanding of physical systems. This begs
the question of whether we can extract governing equations from data [21,

                                       2
